Reservoir Computing for Torque-Restricted Pendulum Control
Fan Ye†, Timothy Bonner†, Arsen Abdulali, Kai-Fung Chu, Fumiya Iida
Abstract— Torque-restricted control remains a significant
challenge in robotics, often necessitating precise modeling or
large amounts of data for effective controller design. To address
this problem, we introduce a novel training method that utilizes
a Reservoir Computing (RC) framework to serve as a model-
free controller that can effectively control a nonlinear robot
using minimal training. This paper explores the application of
the proposed framework to a torque-restricted single pendulum
and achieves similar control performance to that of model-
free reinforcement learning controllers while utilising just 0.5%
of the data and a simple passive data collection method. We
analyze 1,000 unique successful reservoir structures, examining
their internal connectivity and memory properties, and identify
key structural features that enhance control performance.
Finally, this paper also explores our proposed controller’s
robustness to changes in pendulum dimensionality and torque
limit with successful control achieved for a large range of
varying properties without any additional training.
I. INTRODUCTION
Controlling nonlinear dynamical systems is a long-
standing challenge which often requires learning-based meth-
ods that utilise extensive data to capture their complex
behaviors. Recently, reservoir computing–based controllers
operating at the “edge of chaos” have shown promise by
leveraging rich internal dynamics to simulate and predict
system behavior [1]. As a result, these controllers can enable
more sample-efficient control of fully actuated nonlinear
systems, reducing the reliance on large training datasets [2].
Moreover, in addition to providing rich dynamics, reservoirs
possess a form of memory that could be exploited for
planning in torque-restricted nonlinear dynamical systems—
a direction yet to be fully explored. The goal of this paper is
to develop a sample-efficient training method for a reservoir
computing controller [1], apply it to a canonical nonlinear
dynamical system, and perform an extensive analysis. This
analysis may serve as a stepping stone for future research on
more complex dynamical systems [3].
Traditionally, control of torque-restricted systems has been
model-based, aiming to optimize trajectories to a target under
certain constraints imposed on the controller. Algorithms like
the Iterative Linear Quadratic Regulator (iLQR) [4], [5],
Direct Collocation [6], and Feasibility-Driven Differential
Dynamic Programming [7] are commonly used to achieve
stable control. However, these methods require formulating a
*This work was supported by a Huawei HiSilicon Scholarship,
MathWorks-CUED Small Grant Programme, and the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie
Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 101034337.
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Bio-Inspired Robotics Lab, Department of Engineering, University of
Cambridge, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, United Kingdom
aa2335@cam.ac.uk
mathematical model of the robot [8], making them less prac-
tical for complex systems, where computational complexity
of the system may conflict with real-time constraints. As an
alternative, model-free controllers can be trained using data
collected during system operation. Reinforcement learning
(RL) is a popular approach for this purpose, as it allows the
agent to explore the state space and learn optimal actions
through interaction with the environment [9]. Algorithms
such as Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) for
cart-pole swing-up [10] and Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) for
hopper control [11] demonstrate the effectiveness of RL in
robotic control. However, these methods suffer from sample
inefficiency and long training times [12]. One way to mitigate
this issue is by training in simulation [3], however, this
introduces a new challenge—the need for highly accurate
system models [13], [14].
One prospective way to tackle this trade-off is through
model-free learning of the natural dynamics. Reservoir Com-
puting (RC) emerges as a promising candidate for effectively
modeling these dynamics [2], [15] while simultaneously con-
trolling the robot. Due to its rich natural dynamics, the reser-
voir can potentially emulate the robot’s inverse dynamics
and utilize this for control purposes [16]. Furthermore, there
has been evidence that the reservoir can capture dynamical
features of the robot and accelerate the learning process
[17]. There have been a few successful attempts at using
RC for robotic control—for instance, vehicle navigation [18],
[19], chaotic behavior modulation [20], [21], and robotic arm
manipulation [1], [22], [23]. However, in these cases, RC has
generally been used as an alternative to linear controllers,
focusing on fully actuated systems. Considering the rich
nonlinear dynamics [24] and inherent memory [25] in RC,
torque-restricted control becomes an excellent opportunity to
showcase the benefits of using reservoir computers in robotic
control.
In this work, we extend the reservoir computing–based
controller [1] to torque-restricted nonlinear dynamical sys-
tems by introducing a novel training methodology that uses
minimal data and leverages the reservoir’s ability to predict
both the required force and the state of the robot (Fig. 1).
For an in-depth analysis, we apply the proposed approach
to a canonical nonlinear dynamical system, i.e., a torque-
limited pendulum, which allows us to perform comprehen-
sive evaluations and enhance transparency. Thus, the primary
goal of our work is to understand how reservoir computing
operates in the context of planning for torque-restricted
robotic control, rather than focusing on deployment to more
complex robot systems, which we leave for future research.
To evaluate the efficiency of our approach, we employed a
2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2025)
October 19-25, 2025. Hangzhou, China
979-8-3315-4393-8/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE 3823
2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) | 979-8-3315-4393-8/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IROS60139.2025.11247156
Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen Mary University of London. Downloaded on March 03,2026 at 20:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

target train 
2 3
Data collection
(Free dropping)
BalancingPlanning Torque-limited 
pendulum
Reservoir controller Robot
B
A
1
1
2 3
Fig. 1. Reservoir control for torque-restricted robots. (A) The phase portrait
of a torque-limited single pendulum. The green area is directly achievable
by linear controllers, while the red area is not directly achievable and usually
requires motion planning. The red line is an ideal trajectory for the pendulum
to swing up. (B) The flow chart of reservoir control trained by free dropping
the pendulum.
4-node Echo State Network (ESN) [26], [27], and compared
the training time and control performance of our reservoir-
based method against the classical RL algorithm, DDPG.
The results show that our ESN achieves effective control to
swing-up and balance our torque-restricted pendulum within
the range [−π,π ] using only 0.52% of the robot operation
time required by DDPG and a simple data collection method.
Beyond efficiency, we analyzed 1,000 successful ESNs
with randomly initialized interconnections and optimized
hyperparameters, examining their common structures, mem-
ory capacity, and nonlinearity. In addition to understanding
the internal properties of these reservoirs, we evaluated
their robustness to variations in robot properties, including
changes in the torque limit, pendulum length, and mass. Our
findings reveal that a pre-trained ESN can achieve stable
pendulum control across a wide range of conditions, with
torque limits varying from 40% to 100%, pendulum lengths
from 25% to 200%, and mass densities from 10% to 500%
of the nominal values.
The code and data for all simulations are available at
https://github.com/Kyushudy/restorquelimitedpencontrol.git.
A related tutorial is available in Matlab file exchange at
https://uk.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/175030-
reservoir-computing-for-robotic-control.
II. RELATED WORKS
Among model-free learning approaches, reinforcement
learning remains the most widely used framework for non-
linear control tasks. Beginning with Q-learning [28], and
evolving through algorithms such as DDPG [10], SAC [11],
and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [29], advances in
RL have primarily focused on improving sample efficiency
and robustness by refining policy and objective functions.
With increasing awareness of physical constraints inherent
to real-world robotic systems, such as torque, velocity, and
safety limits, recent research has begun to integrate these
constraints into the learning process. Early efforts introduced
constraint terms into the reward function [30] or employed
constrained Markov decision processes [31] to reduce re-
liance on reward engineering. More recent methods incorpo-
rate stochastic termination during training, embedding con-
straints into policy learning [32]. These developments make
constrained RL particularly well suited for tasks involving
hard actuation limits, such as the torque-restricted pendulum
swing-up addressed in this study.
Nonetheless, empirical evaluations indicate that improve-
ments in sample efficiency across RL variants, from DDPG
to SAC, PPO [33], and constrained RL methods [30], [31],
have not achieved gains beyond a single order of magnitude.
In contrast, the proposed reservoir computing-based ap-
proach achieves the pendulum swing-up using only 0.52% of
the robot operation time required by DDPG, demonstrating
a substantial improvement in data efficiency over existing
RL-based methods.
III. METHODS
In this section, we begin by defining the Echo State
Network (ESN), the form of reservoir computing used for
robot control. We then introduce the robot model—a torque-
limited single pendulum—and describe the data collection
process. Next, we outline how the collected data is used to
train the reservoir for swing-up and stabilization. Finally, we
present the complete signal loop of the reservoir controller
in action, demonstrating its connection to the robot.
A. Reservoir Computing: Echo State Networks
An ESN is a type of reservoir computer, whose reservoir
is an N-node recurrent neural network [34]. The update
function of its node states is given by:
˙s(t)τ = −s(t) + tanh(WIn In + Wrs(t)), (1)
s(t + ∆t) = s(t) +
Z t+∆t
t
˙s(t)dt (2)
where ∆t is the simulation timestep, s(t) (dimension
N×1) is the reservoir state matrix,τ is the leakage parameter
that determines the reservoir behavioral timescale, WIn
(N×NIn) is the input weight matrix, In (NIn× 1) is the
input vector, Wr (N×N) is the interconnection recurrent
weight matrix and tanh is the hyperbolic tangent function
for the reservoir’s nonlinearity. Following the conceptual
recommendation in [16], we set τ = 0.085 to enable the
reservoir to respond dynamically to the pendulum’s behavior.
The output of an ESN is a linear combination of a scaled
bias, input, and node states, given by:
Out(t) = WOut[1; In(t); s(t)], (3)
3824
Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen Mary University of London. Downloaded on March 03,2026 at 20:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

where Out (NOut× 1) is the output vector and WOut
(NOut× 1 +NIn +N) is the output weight matrix which is
tunable by training.
Training data consists of the input In, the corresponding
reservoir states s, and the desired output TOut. The output
weight matrix WOut is optimized using ridge regression:
X = [1; In; s] (4)
WOut = TOutX T(XX T +βI)−1, (5)
whereβ is the regularization coefficient and I is an identity
matrix. Note that TOut (NOut×Nt) and X (1+NIn +N×
Nt) are horizontally stacked matrices constructed over the
time series, where Nt denotes the number of timesteps. The
input weight matrix WIn and the reservoir weight matrix
Wr are fixed and not subject to training.
B. Robot: Torque Limited Single Pendulum
𝜃
𝑥(𝑡 + 5𝛿)
𝑥(𝑡 + 𝛿)
𝑥(𝑡)𝜏𝑎
Robot 𝑥 =
𝜃
ሶ𝜃
ሷ𝜃
𝑥(𝑡)
𝑥(𝑡 + 𝛿)
𝑥(𝑡 + 5𝛿)
A B
Fig. 2. Robot model. (A) The single pendulum model and (B) the data
collected from free dropping.
The robotic system used is a torque-limited single pen-
dulum with uniform mass distribution, as shown in Fig.2A.
The dynamics are dictated by:
1
3ml2¨θ =−mgl
2sin(θ) +τa, m =ρabl, (6)
where m is the pendulum mass, θ is the pendulum angle
defined as positive anticlockwise starting facing downwards,
g is gravity, τa is the actuation torque, ρ is the pendulum
density, a is the width, b is the height, l is the full length
of the pendulum. For the base case of our pendulum, the
values of these parameters are ( g = 9.80665m/s2, ρ =
1000kg/m3, a = 0 .02m, b = 0 .02m, l = 0 .2m, and
|τa|≤ 0.05N·m as a torque limit).
Fig.2B shows the training data collection process. During
training, the pendulum is dropped from an initial angle
of (θ0 = π− 0.1rad) without external actuation ( τa =
0N·m) and is able to swing-freely. This simple training
method highlights the reservoir’s ability to emulate the
robot’s inverse dynamics through passive data collection. For
default cases, the pendulum is free-dropped in simulation
for 20 seconds, from which we collected the robot’s state
x = [θ; ˙θ; ¨θ] at a timestep of 0.01s and its delayed version
(x(t),x (t +δ),x (t + 5δ)), where δ = 0.1s.
C. Training a reservoir controller
Although derived from the same training data, the training
process is divided into two distinct stages: first, training for
actuation torque, and second, training to plan the pendulum’s
target state.
1) Training for Applied Torque: Training the reservoir to
control the pendulum requires the robot’s state data with a
short delay, (x(t),x (t +δ)), along with an approximation of
the target torque, Tτ . In this setup, the reservoir learns to
transition the robot from its current state, x(t), to a desired
future state, x(t +δ), by generating a torque command, τa.
Since the reservoir lacks an accurate model of the robot,
it must approximate this torque, and while the true moment
of inertia is I = 0.0011 kg· m2, Tτ is estimated as Tτ = ˜I ¨θ
where ˜I = 0.01 kg· m2, a flexible assumption as elaborated
in Sec. V-C. Consequently, for mapping to desired torque,
the input and target signals for Eq. 5 are:
In =


θ(t)
˙θ(t)
θ(t +δ)
˙θ(t +δ)
0
0


, TOut(1) =
Tτ(t)
. (7)
2) Training for Planned Robot State: Training the reser-
voir to plan the pendulum’s trajectory requires the robot’s
state data with both a short and long delay ( x(t),x (t +
δ),x (t + 5δ)). In this case, the reservoir learns to predict
the middle intermediary ’planned’ state x(t +δ) between
the given current state x(t) and the final state x(t + 5δ).
Therefore, the input signal and target signal are:
In =


θ(t)
˙θ(t)
0
0
θ(t + 5δ)
˙θ(t + 5δ)


, TOut(2) =
θ(t +δ)
˙θ(t +δ)

. (8)
D. During Control
𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡
𝜃
ሶ𝜃
𝜃𝐼𝑛
∗
ሶ𝜃𝐼𝑛
∗
𝜃𝑟∗
ሶ𝜃𝑟∗
𝑊𝑂𝑢𝑡
Robot
𝑆1
𝑆2
𝑆3
𝑆4
𝑆1 𝑆2
𝑆3 𝑆4
𝜃
ሶ𝜃
𝜃
ሶ𝜃𝜃𝑂𝑢𝑡
∗
ሶ𝜃𝑂𝑢𝑡
∗
Reservoir
𝜏𝑎
Fig. 3. Data structure of the reservoir controller. The reservoir node 1
receives pendulum angle θ, and node 3 receives ˙θ. The reservoir state of
four nodes, together with other inputs, are linearly combined by the weight
matrix WOut to generate outputs.
During control, the reservoir controller produces 3 outputs
(Nout): one for the immediate actuation torque (Eq. 7) and
3825
Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen Mary University of London. Downloaded on March 03,2026 at 20:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

two for the intermediary planned state (Eq. 8). Both functions
share only the inputs θ and ˙θ. Therefore, to enable the same
reservoir to be used for both applications, the ESN receives
onlyθ and ˙θ as inputs to its recurrent neural network, while
other inputs are directly connected to the output layer (see
Fig. 3).
Assuming the temporary target state is θ∗
In and ˙θ∗
In , the
final target state is θ∗
r and ˙θ∗
r, and the reservoir planned state
is θ∗
Out and ˙θ∗
Out, we have the overall input weight matrix,
input, and output as:
WIn =


1 0
−1 0
0 1
0 −1

, In =
θ
˙θ

, Out =


τa
θ∗
Out
˙θ∗
Out

, (9)
where the actuation torque τa is clipped to satisfy |τa|≤
0.05N· m, as the reservoir controller may generate outputs
exceeding this limit.
During the pendulum swing-up, the reservoir’s planned
intermediary state, θ∗
Out and ˙θ∗
Out, is used as the temporary
target for deducing actuation torque as in Eq.7. Once the
pendulum is sufficiently close to the final target, the control
objective switches from the predicted state to the final target,
allowing the reservoir to transition to a balancing phase. This
can be mathematically expressed as:
[θ∗
In; ˙θ∗
In] =
(
[θ∗
Out; ˙θ∗
Out], for|θ∗
r−θ|≥ π
4
[θ∗
r; ˙θ∗
r], for|θ∗
r−θ|< π
4
(10)
IV. RESULTS
We begin by analyzing one ESN’s (ESN 1) ability to per-
form the swing-up and balancing tasks required for a torque-
restricted pendulum to reach the desired angle, π, using the
proposed framework. Additionally, we compare this method
to the DDPG approach in terms of efficiency and control
performance, highlighting the strengths and limitations of
reservoir-based control.
A. Balancing and Motion Prediction
A B
Fig. 4. Example of pendulum control. (A) The pendulum is fully actuated
and the reservoir controller aims to balance θ between [−π,π ]. (B) The
pendulum is torque-restrictedτlim = 0.05 N m and the reservoir is planning
a path θ∗
Out from the initial state θ(0) = 0 to the final target state θ∗
r =π.
Fig. 4 evaluates the balancing and swing-up performance
of the first successful reservoir. When provided with suffi-
cient torque (Fig. 4A), the controller successfully balances
the pendulum across the full range of motion, θ∗
r∈ [−π,π ].
Under torque-limited conditions (Fig. 4B), the reservoir
adapts by planning an intermediate state, as evidenced by the
increasing waveform amplitude. When combined, as shown
in Fig. 6, the combination of swing-up and balancing enables
a complete control path, allowing the pendulum to reach
any angle within the full range of motion, even when full-
actuation torque is insufficient.
B. Robot Operation Time: Reservoir Computing vs. Rein-
forcement Learning
DDPG is a benchmark model-free controller for torque-
limited single pendulums. Similar to ESN 1, the actuation
torqueτa is clipped to comply with the torque limits after be-
ing generated by the DDPG controller. We used its Simulink
implementation to control the same torque-limited baseline
system and compared its performance to ESN 1 in terms of
mean squared error (MSE) and training time, highlighting its
distinct advantages. Training time is defined as the product
of episode length and the number of episodes for DDPG,
whereas for the ESN, it corresponds to the total simulation
time used to collect the training data in Eq. 5, which, in our
optimal case, is just 12 seconds.
      
            
  
 
 
 
 
 
            
                    
    
            
         
   
           
        
Fig. 5. Datasize comparison between DDPG and ESN 1. The x-axis is
the logged robot operation time (t) required by training data, and the y-
axis is the logged MSE (e) for control. The dots indicate each episode of
DDPG and ESN. The triangles indicate the first successful trial to swing
the pendulum upwards. The hexagrams indicate the trial that has minimum
MSE.
Fig. 5 compares the robot operation time required for
training between ESN 1 and DDPG. The first successful
swing-up attempt occurs at (t = 12s,e = 1.65) for ESN1 and
(t = 2300s, e = 2.30) for DDPG. The best performance is
achieved at (t = 68s, e = 1.15) for ESN 1 and (t = 82060s,
e = 0.25) for DDPG.
These results indicate that ESN 1 requires only 0.52% of
the robot operation time used by DDPG to achieve sufficient
torque-limited pendulum control. While DDPG ultimately
achieves a lower minimum control error, this small improve-
ment comes at the cost of significantly longer training time,
suggesting that our RC framework is the preferable choice
under training time constraints.
3826
Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen Mary University of London. Downloaded on March 03,2026 at 20:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

V. ANALYSIS
Using the reservoir computing framework, we can analyze
how reservoir structure influences control performance and
understand how the reservoir is able to emulate the robot
dynamics and perform control. While the hyperparameters
remain standardized, the internal reservoir structure varies
due to the random initialization of Wr, leading to differences
in control effectiveness. To systematically evaluate these
effects, we generated 1,000 successful ESNs with unique
random interconnections under specified hyperparameters
(N = 4 , τ = 0.085, spectral radius = 1.1, connectivity
= 0.5, and regularization coefficient β = 0.1). Using above
hyperparameters, the control success rate of randomly gener-
ated reservoirs is approximately 5%. Methods for improving
this rate through hyperparameter optimization have been
proposed in [16]. This section examines the characteristics
of successful reservoirs and their robustness to variations in
the robot’s properties. Among the generated ESNs, the first
working model, ESN 1, is used as a representative case to
evaluate reservoir control performance and robustness.
A
B
Fig. 6. Control performance of random ESNs. These ESNs have different
interconnectionsWr, therefore swinging the pendulum up in various ways,
summarized to monotonically (A) and non-monotonically (B) increasing the
waveform amplitude.
Given the 1,000 successful ESNs, control performance
varies significantly, as shown in Fig. 6. Despite all seven
selected ESNs successfully swinging up and balancing the
pendulum, their control strategies and performance differ,
highlighting how the interaction between the reservoir and
the pendulum shapes control behavior.
Fig. 6A shows that ESN 1, ESN2, and ESN 3 achieve con-
trol through varying rates of monotonic amplitude increase.
In contrast, Fig. 6B illustrates that ESN 4 through ESN 7
exhibit non-monotonic amplitude growth, demonstrating how
different reservoir structures result in distinct control char-
acteristics. For instance, ESN 4 experiences overshoot due
to aggressive amplitude increases, while ESN 5 follows a
uniquely low-frequency trajectory. The trajectory of ESN 7
resembles a combination of multiple waveforms, whereas
ESN6 represents a shorter variation of this pattern.
These variations in control performance emphasize the
dependency of control strategies on reservoir structure, il-
lustrating how different reservoirs capture varying degrees
of robot dynamics.
A. Reservoir Interconnections
    
    
 
 
 
   
    
     
     
     
     
    
    
     
    
    
     
    
     
    
     
    
  
  
                        
    
    
 
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
      
      
   
  
  
                     
A
B
𝜃
ሶ𝜃
𝜃
ሶ𝜃
Rare
Frequent
Positive Negative Positive
Fig. 7. The interconnections of 1,000 randomly generated ESNs that can
swing the pendulum up. (A) The frequency of a connection occurrence and
(B) the mean connection strength. Given the term ˙s∼ Wrs in update
function Eq.1, the connection is from column to row.
Fig. 7 illustrates the interconnection distribution among
the 1,000 successful ESNs, suggesting successful reservoirs
display distinct characteristics, with deviations from this
main structure causing the variations in control performance
as shown in Fig. 6. With a connectivity hyperparameter of
0.5, the expected mean occurrence of connections between
nodes is approximately 500. However, as shown in Fig. 7A,
the actual connection occurrences among working ESNs are
closer to 400, suggesting that the torque-restricted control
task favors ESNs with sparser interconnections.
Additionally, connections between nodes 1 and 2 occur
less frequently than those from nodes 3 and 4 to nodes 1
and 2, indicating a greater reliance on connections directly
related to angular velocity.
Fig. 7B shows the mean connection strength between
nodes, suggesting that a specific reservoir structure is pre-
ferred for successful dynamic encapsulation. Uniformly gen-
erating interconnections, the mean strength should be ap-
proximately 0. However, clear preferences in connection
strength are displayed indicating a structural bias. In general,
connections between adjacent nodes (e.g., nodes 1–2) are
negative, whereas connections between non-adjacent nodes
(e.g., nodes 2–4) are positive, indicating a strong structural
preference for success.
3827
Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen Mary University of London. Downloaded on March 03,2026 at 20:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Notably, all self-recurrent connections are positive, while
the majority of non-recurrent ones are negative, suggesting
a temporal dependency in which certain past inputs are
retained and others suppressed to achieve effective control.
B. Robustness: Varying Torque Limit
The default torque limit used previously,τlim = 0.05 N·m,
allows the pendulum to balance within[−38.7◦, 38.7◦]. How-
ever, this limit remains relatively large for single pendulums.
To assess the robustness of the proposed reservoir controller
ESN1 under more constrained conditions, we reduced τlim
to 0.02 N·m, restricting the balance range to [−14.5◦, 14.5◦].
A
B
Fig. 8. Robustness against various torque limit τlim. (A) The robot
trajectories and (B) the actuation torque τa provided by reservoir controller
ESN1.
Fig. 8 shows that ESN 1 successfully performed swing-
up and balancing without additional training across a wide
range of imposed torque limits, τlim ∈ [0.02, 0.05] N·m.
As expected, smaller torque limits led to longer times for
the pendulum to reach the desired angle. Nevertheless, all
values within this range ultimately enabled the pendulum to
reach the target angle through a combination of swing-up
and balancing.
Fig. 8B further illustrates how torque limits influence
control behavior. Smaller torque limits lead to lower torque
switch frequencies, demonstrating the reservoir’s adaptability
to imposed constraints and different robot states. Notably,
the torque switch frequency is initially high at the start of
the motion but gradually decreases over time, reflecting the
system’s stabilization as the pendulum approaches its target
state.
C. Robustness: Varying Pendulum Properties
The default robot parameters used throughout are ρ =
1000 kg/m3 andl = 0.2 m. According to Eq. 7, the reservoir
is trained to balance the pendulum based on an estimated
moment of inertia, which is fixed throughout this section.
Therefore changing the true moment of inertia and fixing
the estimate indicates the controller’s robustness to varying
pendulum properties. Since ρ influences this estimation,
varying it from 10% to 500% introduces estimation errors,
allowing us to assess their impact on control performance.
Similarly, as shown in Eq. 6, l is the primary parameter
governing the robot’s dynamics. By varying l from 25% to
200%, we evaluate the reservoir’s ability to generalize across
different dynamical systems in torque-restricted control. To
assess robustness, we test the reservoir controller under two
conditions: using a pre-trained reservoir and re-training it for
each variation of parameters.
A B
Fig. 9. Robustness against various pendulum density ρ and length l. The
heatmap shows logged MSE (e), and the white area indicates the failure of
swinging the pendulum up. (A) The case where ESN 1 is pre-trained with a
default pendulum ρ = 1000 kg/m3 l = 0.2 m and reservoir tested control
errors on various pendulums. (B) The case where ESN 1 is retrained for each
pendulum and tested corresponding control errors.
1) Pre-training the Reservoir: Fig. 9A shows the robust-
ness of a pre-trained ESN 1 across varying pendulum lengths
and densities. The output weights WOut are pre-trained on
a default pendulum (ρ = 1000 kg/m3,l = 0.2 m) and remain
fixed for different robot parameters. Control errore increases
significantly with l but remains largely unaffected by ρ.
White streaks in the graph indicate parameter combinations
where control fails, with l slightly increasing alongside ρ,
suggesting joint effects of torque estimation errors and robot
dynamics. ESN 1 achieves control for l from 25% to 200%
and ρ from 10% to 500%, with shorter l enabling control
up to 5000% of the default ρ. As l increases, the maximum
feasible ρ decreases, reaching 2400% at l = 200%.
2) Re-training the Reservoir: Fig. 9B shows the robust-
ness of a re-trained ESN1. For each parameter variation, new
training data are collected to update WOut, while all other
parameters, including WIn and Wr, are retained from the
original ESN 1. Retraining stabilizes control error across all
feasible l and ρ, but significantly narrows the controllable l
range to 45%–110%. In contrast,ρ remains fully controllable
from 10% to 5000% regardless of l, indicating a higher
robustness when changing ρ compared to l.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In our work, we developed a training framework to enable
a reservoir computer to act as a model-free controller for a
torque-limited single pendulum, a substantial improvement
upon the fully actuated reservoir computing-based control
method case as described [1]. Compared with traditional
model-free controllers, our proposed reservoir controller sig-
nificantly reduces the amount of data required for training -
3828
Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen Mary University of London. Downloaded on March 03,2026 at 20:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

with ESN1 only taking 0.52% of the robot operation time re-
quired by DDPG. Furthermore, the data collection method is
simple, allowing for data collection from freely dropping of
the pendulum. This new method addresses current challenges
faced in torque-restricted robot control: the requirement of
an accurate model or large data size.
We created 1,000 successful ESNs to show that successful
reservoir controllers are reproducible using our framework.
Besides, these functional ESNs show clear preferences in
interconnection structures, see Fig.7. Furthermore, ESNs
with a small number of nodes, in this case 4, can still achieve
stable control, indicating the requirement for memory and
nonlinearity might be low for pendulum control. Consequen-
tially, the use of small reservoirs to control robots becomes
an economical choice to reduce computational resources
requirements.
Our proposed ESN 1 controller is robust against varying
torque limits, pendulum lengths, and mass densities, indi-
cating the generalizability of reservoirs in encapsulating dy-
namics. The comparison between pre-trained and re-trained
reservoirs in Fig. 9 shows that a reservoir pre-trained with
quality data can be more robust than a re-trained one. This
is likely due to a mismatch between the reservoir and robot
dynamics during re-training, suggesting a key insight for
reservoir controllers: in many cases, it is preferable to either
use a well-pretrained reservoir or train a completely new one
rather than re-training an existing controller.
Although the selection of reservoir hyperparameters for
control tasks has been explored in [16], the influence of
control-related parameters specific to the pendulum system
remains under-investigated. For instance, the longest delayed
state used in the reservoir input isx(t+5δ), and the actuation
torque is estimated using an approximate moment of inertia,
denoted as ˜I.
We choose 5δ = 0.5 s based on the natural dynamics of
the system: a pendulum of length 0.2 m undergoes one full
cycle of free fall in approximately 1 s, as demonstrated in the
appendix video. Thus, 5δ = 0.5 s aligns with half a swing
cycle. Assuming the state x(t) corresponds to the positive
peak of θ, then x(t + 5δ) approximates the negative peak,
while x(t +δ) becomes their intermediate. This temporal
structure provides diverse training data that supports the
reservoir in learning a feasible swing-up trajectory. The
performance of the re-trained reservoir shown in Fig. 9B
likely reflects this effect: the swing-up success may be more
sensitive to the pendulum’s length, since it directly affects the
timescale of the motion and thus the temporal resolution of
the training data, than to its mass, which does not influence
the timescale. Nonetheless, a more systematic investigation
is needed to understand why a delay of +5δ is sufficient for
enabling swing-up behavior.
To estimate the required actuation torque, we use a sim-
plified relation: Tτ = ˜I ¨θ. This approximation assumes a
direct proportionality between torque and angular acceler-
ation, while neglecting Coriolis, gravitational, and damping
effects, which are unknown in the absence of an explicit
model. We select ˜I = 0 .01 kg · m2, approximately an
order of magnitude larger than the actual moment of inertia
of the pendulum, to overcome these unmodeled effects.
However, the precise system response to τa = Tτ remains
to be characterized, and future work is needed to model the
system dynamics and rigorously assess stability under this
approximation.
There are still some drawbacks to using reservoir con-
trollers. As shown in Fig. 5, while ESN 1 requires signif-
icantly less robot operation time than DDPG to achieve
control, it tends to converge to a local minimum over
time, whereas DDPG has a higher likelihood of finding the
global minimum of control errors. Additionally, the current
application of the proposed model is limited to mapping a
reservoir onto a torque-restricted pendulum.
To address these limitations, future work will focus on
extending the RC framework to more complex nonlinear
robotic systems, requiring a deeper understanding of the
relationship between reservoir structure and controller per-
formance. While the current results are promising, they are
empirically derived, and analytical solutions may be neces-
sary to assess whether a controller can sufficiently capture
a robot’s dynamics—an essential step in advancing this
method. Moreover, although simulated examples effectively
illustrate the principle, real-world experiments will be crucial
for validating practical applications, where unknown factors
such as signal noise may impact controller performance.
Additionally, when a physical reservoir is employed, such
as the Bernoulli-Ball system [35] or a traffic network [36],
inherent stochasticity within the reservoir may also influence
system performance.
REFERENCES
[1] Z.-M. Zhai, M. Moradi, L.-W. Kong, B. Glaz, M. Haile, and Y .-C. Lai,
“Model-free tracking control of complex dynamical trajectories with
machine learning,” Nature communications , vol. 14, no. 1, p. 5698,
2023.
[2] M. Yan, C. Huang, P. Bienstman, P. Tino, W. Lin, and J. Sun,
“Emerging opportunities and challenges for the future of reservoir
computing,” Nature Communications, vol. 15, no. 1, p. 2056, 2024.
[3] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V . Tsounis,
V . Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning agile and dynamic motor skills
for legged robots,” Science Robotics, vol. 4, no. 26, p. eaau5872, 2019.
[4] W. Li and E. Todorov, “Iterative linear quadratic regulator design
for nonlinear biological movement systems,” in First International
Conference on Informatics in Control, Automation and Robotics ,
vol. 2, pp. 222–229, SciTePress, 2004.
[5] E. Todorov and W. Li, “A generalized iterative lqg method for locally-
optimal feedback control of constrained nonlinear stochastic systems,”
in Proceedings of the 2005, American Control Conference, 2005. ,
pp. 300–306, IEEE, 2005.
[6] C. R. Hargraves and S. W. Paris, “Direct trajectory optimization using
nonlinear programming and collocation,” Journal of guidance, control,
and dynamics, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 338–342, 1987.
[7] C. Mastalli, R. Budhiraja, W. Merkt, G. Saurel, B. Hammoud,
M. Naveau, J. Carpentier, L. Righetti, S. Vijayakumar, and
N. Mansard, “Crocoddyl: An efficient and versatile framework for
multi-contact optimal control,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 2536–2542, IEEE, 2020.
[8] Z.-S. Hou and Z. Wang, “From model-based control to data-driven
control: Survey, classification and perspective,” Information Sciences,
vol. 235, pp. 3–35, 2013.
[9] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. W. Moore, “Reinforcement
learning: A survey,” Journal of artificial intelligence research , vol. 4,
pp. 237–285, 1996.
3829
Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen Mary University of London. Downloaded on March 03,2026 at 20:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

[10] T. Lillicrap, “Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971 , 2015.
[11] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Off-
policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic
actor,” in International conference on machine learning , pp. 1861–
1870, PMLR, 2018.
[12] D. Yarats, A. Zhang, I. Kostrikov, B. Amos, J. Pineau, and R. Fergus,
“Improving sample efficiency in model-free reinforcement learning
from images,” in Proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial
intelligence, vol. 35, pp. 10674–10681, 2021.
[13] W. Zhao, J. P. Queralta, and T. Westerlund, “Sim-to-real transfer in
deep reinforcement learning for robotics: a survey,” in 2020 IEEE
symposium series on computational intelligence (SSCI) , pp. 737–744,
IEEE.
[14] T. Haarnoja, B. Moran, G. Lever, S. H. Huang, D. Tirumala, J. Hump-
lik, M. Wulfmeier, S. Tunyasuvunakool, N. Y . Siegel, R. Hafner,
M. Bloesch, K. Hartikainen, A. Byravan, L. Hasenclever, Y . Tassa,
F. Sadeghi, N. Batchelor, F. Casarini, S. Saliceti, C. Game, N. Sreen-
dra, K. Patel, M. Gwira, A. Huber, N. Hurley, F. Nori, R. Hadsell, and
N. Heess, “Learning agile soccer skills for a bipedal robot with deep
reinforcement learning,” Science Robotics, vol. 9, no. 89, p. eadi8022,
2024.
[15] B. Schrauwen, D. Verstraeten, and J. Van Campenhout, “An overview
of reservoir computing: theory, applications and implementations,”
in Proceedings of the 15th european symposium on artificial neural
networks. p. 471-482 2007 , pp. 471–482.
[16] F. Ye, A. Abdulali, K.-F. Chu, X. Zhang, and F. Iida, “Reservoir
controllers design though robot-reservoir timescale alignment,” Com-
munications Engineering, vol. 4, pp. 1–12, Apr. 2025.
[17] C. Giannetto, I. Atadjanov, F. Iida, and A. Abdulali, “Reservoir Com-
puting Encodes Physical Adaptations for Reinforcement Learning,”
in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), IEEE, 2025.
[18] E. Antonelo, B. Schrauwen, and D. Stroobandt, “Modeling multiple
autonomous robot behaviors and behavior switching with a single
reservoir computing network,” in 2008 IEEE International Conference
on Systems, Man and Cybernetics , pp. 1843–1848, IEEE.
[19] E. A. Antonelo and B. Schrauwen, “On learning navigation behaviors
for small mobile robots with reservoir computing architectures,” IEEE
transactions on neural networks and learning systems , vol. 26, no. 4,
pp. 763–780, 2014.
[20] K. Inoue, K. Nakajima, and Y . Kuniyoshi, “Designing spontaneous
behavioral switching via chaotic itinerancy,” Science advances, vol. 6,
no. 46, p. eabb3989, 2020.
[21] D. Canaday, A. Pomerance, and D. J. Gauthier, “Model-free control
of dynamical systems with deep reservoir computing,” Journal of
Physics: Complexity, vol. 2, no. 3, p. 035025, 2021.
[22] H. Hauser, A. J. Ijspeert, R. M. F ¨uchslin, R. Pfeifer, and W. Maass,
“Towards a theoretical foundation for morphological computation with
compliant bodies,” Biological cybernetics , vol. 105, pp. 355–370,
2011.
[23] H. Hauser and G. Griesbacher, “Moving a robot arm by exploiting
its complex compliant morphology,” in Proceedings of the 2nd In-
ternational Conference on Morphological Computation , University of
Zurich.
[24] R. Gencay and T. Liu, “Nonlinear modelling and prediction with feed-
forward and recurrent networks,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena ,
vol. 108, no. 1-2, pp. 119–134, 1997.
[25] H. Jaeger, “Short term memory in echo state networks,” 2001.
[26] H. Jaeger and H. Haas, “Harnessing nonlinearity: Predicting chaotic
systems and saving energy in wireless communication,” science,
vol. 304, no. 5667, pp. 78–80, 2004.
[27] H. Jaeger, “The “echo state” approach to analysing and training
recurrent neural networks-with an erratum note,” Bonn, Germany:
German National Research Center for Information Technology GMD
Technical Report, vol. 148, no. 34, p. 13, 2001.
[28] C. J. C. H. Watkins and P. Dayan, “Q-learning,” Machine Learning ,
vol. 8, pp. 279–292, May 1992.
[29] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms,” Aug. 2017.
[30] Y . Kim, H. Oh, J. Lee, J. Choi, G. Ji, M. Jung, D. Youm, and
J. Hwangbo, “Not Only Rewards but Also Constraints: Applications on
Legged Robot Locomotion,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 40,
pp. 2984–3003, 2024.
[31] J. Lee, L. Schroth, V . Klemm, M. Bjelonic, A. Reske, and M. Hutter,
“Evaluation of Constrained Reinforcement Learning Algorithms for
Legged Locomotion,” Sept. 2023.
[32] E. Chane-Sane, P.-A. Leziart, T. Flayols, O. Stasse, P. Sou `eres, and
N. Mansard, “CaT: Constraints as Terminations for Legged Loco-
motion Reinforcement Learning,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 13303–
13310, Oct. 2024.
[33] S. Fujimoto, H. Hoof, and D. Meger, “Addressing function approxi-
mation error in actor-critic methods,” in International conference on
machine learning, pp. 1587–1596, PMLR, 2018.
[34] M. Luko ˇseviˇcius, A practical guide to applying echo state networks ,
pp. 659–686. Springer, 2012.
[35] F. Ye, A. Abdulali, and F. Iida, “Evaluation of The Stochasticity in The
Collective Bernoulli-ball System as A Physical Reservoir Computer,”
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, vol. 1321,
p. 012012, Dec. 2024.
[36] K.-F. Chu, F. Ye, A. Abdulali, and F. Iida, “Enhancing traffic
dynamics-induced machine learning through heterogeneous driving
policies,” npj Unconventional Computing , vol. 2, p. 18, July 2025.
3830
Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen Mary University of London. Downloaded on March 03,2026 at 20:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 